Lead, mercury (including the mercury in laptop backlights), cadmium, chromium, brominated
flame retardants, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)—what do they all have in common?
They are toxic to the environment and to humans if mishandled. They are widely used in
electronics, including computers, printers, and monitors, so you must dispose of or recycle
these items in the proper manner. You should never discard them directly into the trash
where they will end up in landfills and potentially pollute the groundwater.
In addition, electronics contain plastic, steel, aluminum, and precious metals—all of which
are recoverable and recyclable. Provide containers in which to collect these components for
proper sorting and disposal. Check with local agencies to ensure that you comply with local
government regulations concerning disposal of all computer waste materials.

Batteries
Many batteries contain environmentally hazardous materials, such as lithium, mercury, or
nickel and cadmium, so you cannot just put them in the trash where they will end up in a
landfill. Many communities have special recycling depots that accept batteries so they do
not introduce harmful elements into the environment; they may also periodically conduct
hazardous material pickups in which you can hand over toxic materials, such as batteries
and paint, for proper disposal.
Never store computer batteries for extended periods, and never leave batteries in equipment
being stored for extended periods because battery casings are notorious for corroding, allowing
the chemicals inside to leak or explode out. Leaking or exploding chemicals can create a mess,
destroy nearby components, and cause skin burns if you touch them.

Laser Printer Toner Cartridges
Laser printer toner cartridges contain the toner, which is the print medium for laser
printers, and they often contain other components important to the printing process, such
as the photosensitive imaging drum. Toner is plastic powder combined with pigment and a
small amount of iron. Although the chemical makeup of laser toner may not be harmful, the
super-fine powder poses a hazard to your lungs. Be careful when cleaning up toner residue,
using a damp cloth for any residue outside the printer and a filtered vacuum (antistatic, if
possible) when cleaning up spilled toner inside a printer. Unplug the printer before using a
vacuum inside it.
When working with laser printers and handling toner cartridges, avoid breathing
in the toner powder.
The cartridges for some laser printers also contain the cylindrical photosensitive
imaging drum, the cleaning blade, and other components that are also considered
consumables because you normally replace the entire cartridge together with its contents
once the toner is gone.
Laser printer toner cartridges provide a potential environmental hazard due in part to their
large numbers and the space they can take up in a landfill. For this reason, you should not
simply throw them away. Most toner cartridges have reusable components. Many companies
will buy back used toner cartridges, refill and recondition them (if necessary), and then resell
them.

Ink Cartridges
The most common color printers found in homes and offices are inkjet printers that use wet
ink that comes in cartridges. These cartridges are reusable, or you can recycle them for the
plastic and other materials they contain. Many organizations accept used inkjet cartridges
for recycling. Some, such as retailers, have collection containers for printer cartridges and
other computer waste and will give you credit toward new or recharged cartridges.
Display Devices
Because CRT monitors are obsolete, your primary interaction with them will be to dispose
of them. CRTs contain lead, which is toxic to the environment but is also a useful recyclable
metal. Never throw CRTs in trash destined for a landfill. Always search for ways to recycle
a CRT.
Flat-panel displays, including those in laptop computers, use fluorescent lamps that
contain toxic material, so these displays must also be recycled. Call your local waste
disposal organization and arrange to drop off monitors at its site. Many communities
advertise locations and hours for these recycling services.
Circuit Boards
Circuit boards are mostly plastic, but the chips and transistors mounted to the boards are
typically attached using lead solder, and lead can be bad for the environment. Circuit boards
should be taken to recycling centers rather than put in the regular trash.


Cell Phones and Tablets
Even though they are small, cell phones and tablets are still computers and still contain
many of the same materials that are bad for the environment, including lead solder in circuit
boards and heavy metals such as lead, mercury, and cadmium in batteries. Therefore, you
should not put them in the regular trash; always recycle them. Many companies will pay
for used cell phones, whether working or not, so you may be able to make a few dollars.
Recycling centers exist in most communities that will take these devices. For example,
Call2Recycle.org provides a ZIP code lookup of electronics recycling drop-off locations.


Chemical Solvents and Cans
All chemical solvents are potentially hazardous to the environment, so you must dispose
of them properly. If you are unsure of the proper handling or disposal procedures for
a chemical, look for its material safety data sheet (MSDS). An MSDS is a standardized
document that contains general information, ingredients, and fire and explosion warnings,
as well as health, disposal, and safe transportation information about a particular product.
Any manufacturer that sells a potentially hazardous product must issue an MSDS for it.
Industry terminology has recently changed, and MSDS is now more commonly
reerred to as saety data sheet (SDS). However, CompTIA still uses MSDS.
If an MSDS did not come with a particular
chemical, contact the manufacturer or search
for it on the Internet. To find an MSDS on
a particular product or type of product, use
a search engine with appropriate keywords,
including “MSDS” or “SDS” and terms associated
with the product.
Many communities collect solvents and paints and make them available for recycling.
Residents can go to the recycling center and obtain the solvents or paints for free or at
a reduced cost. Those solvents and paints deemed unsafe for recycling are disposed of
properly. Look for a hazardous material pickup or depot in your area.
Similarly, empty cans, including aerosol cans, should be disposed of in an appropriate
manner. Contact your local waste disposal company for the proper handling and disposal
of empty cans that once held solvents or other toxic materials. They may be as dangerous
as their previous contents.
