Extinguishing Fires
If a fire should start, your first concern is safety for yourself and others. It is often better
to escape a fire, trigger a fire alarm, and close doors behind you than to try to fight it.

The typical workplace has a variety of potential fire sources and fuels.

The wiring in the wall, as well as
in any equipment or appliance, could develop a short, resulting in heat that could spread to
nearby fuels such as paper, solvents, or furniture. Fire extinguishers come in several classes
based on the fuel feeding the fire.

Class A Use for fires involving ordinary combustible materials, such as wood, paper,
cardboard, and most plastics.
Class B Use on fires involving flammable or combustible liquids, including gasoline,
kerosene, grease, and oil.
Class C Use on fires involving electrical equipment, such as wiring, circuit breakers, outlets,
computers, and appliances. The material in a Class C extinguisher is nonconductive
to reduce the risk of shock that could result from using a conductive material.
Class D Use on chemical fires involving magnesium, titanium, potassium, and sodium.
Class K Use on fires involving cooking oils, trans fats, or other fats in cooking appliances.
This type of extinguisher should be in commercial kitchens and restaurants.


Some fire extinguishers contain dry chemicals, which leave a residue that reduces the
chance of the fire reigniting, and some dry chemical extinguishers are rated for more than
one class, which is very handy for a multiple-fuel fire.

Some Class B and C extinguishers contain carbon dioxide (CO2), a nonflammable gas.
One advantage of a CO2 extinguisher is that it does not leave a residue, but because a CO2
extinguisher relies on high pressure, it may shoot out bits of dry ice. Never use a CO2
extinguisher on a Class A fire because it may not smother the fire enough to fully extinguish it.
Another nonflammable gas sometimes used in Class B and C fire extinguishers is halon,
with nitrogen as a propellant. Halon fire extinguishers are ideal for electronic equipment
because they leave no residue; in addition, halon extinguishers are effective on Class A
fires. However, halon was classified as an ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) under
the Clean Air Act, and production of halon ceased in 1994. There are no federal or state
regulations prohibiting the buying, selling, or use of halon extinguishers, but once the
existing supply of halon has been depleted, no more will be created.

Two of the most popular Halon alternatives are 3M™ Novec™ 1230 Fire Protection Fluid and FM-200™. These clean agents have similar benefits of Halon, including being able to be used in occupied spaces and not leaving a residue, so they are safe for equipment and minimize any downtime from a lengthy cleanup. The advantage over Halon is that both 3M Novec 1230 fluid and FM-200™ have an Ozone Depletion Potential of 0 and will not cause harm to the ozone layer. Another clean agent option is CO2. CO2 will not harm the ozone layer or contribute to global warming, but the drawback of using CO2 is that it displaces the oxygen to suppress the fire. This could lead to suffocation when used in occupied spaces. There are numerous Halon replacements out on the market. When selecting a clean agent fire suppression system, it is important to evaluate all of our options.
