

Liting Techniques When Moving Equipment
In the United States, lifting is the number-one cause of back injuries. When lifting and moving
computer equipment or any objects, take the time to do it safely, protecting yourself and
the equipment.

Liting Weight Limits
There are no government regulations about what an employee can lift, and the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has no standards written for many specific workplace
lifting situations. This is because the actual circumstances differ widely, and weight is just one
consideration.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) publishes a lifting
equation so that employers can evaluate the lifting tasks for employees and establish a
recommended weight limit. This is a rather complicated equation requiring considerable
effort to gather information about each situation. Government agencies and other organizations
have created calculators based on this equation to help employees establish guidelines for
lifting.

Tips or Safe Lifting and Moving
The best protection is common sense and very careful lifting. So when lifting a heavy object,
protect your back by following these tips:
■ Plan the move and clear the path before beginning.
■ Move as close to the item as possible.
■ Check the weight of the equipment to see if you need assistance in lifting and
moving it.
■ Keep your back straight and vertical to the floor.
■ Keep your head up and look straight ahead.
■ Do not stoop, but bend your knees.
■ Carry the item close to your body.
■ Tighten the abdominal muscles to help your back.
■ Use slow, smooth movements, and do not twist your back while lifting.
■ Don’t try to carry heavy items farther than a few feet without the aid of a utility cart.






Avoiding Touch Hazards
Whenever handling computer components, be careful of the sharp edges on sheet metal
computer cases and in some peripherals. It is easy to cut yourself on these. Similarly, the
backs of many circuit boards contain very sharp wire ends that can cause puncture wounds.
Work gloves offer protection, even if they are a bit awkward to use while handling delicate
computer equipment. If you cannot wear gloves, be cautious, checking each surface before
positioning your hands.
Heat can also be a hazard. Some components, such as a central processing unit (CPU)
heat sink and a laser printer’s fuser, remain hot enough to burn you for several minutes after
powering them down. Cautiously check for hot components by holding your hand near, but
not on, computer components before you touch them.


Avoiding Electric Shock
Both high voltage and low voltage can be
dangerous, so be sure to follow precautions when
working around high- and low-voltage devices
and avoid contact with them. Leave servicing
high-voltage peripherals such as monitors, laser
printers, and power supplies to technicians
trained in that area. Even when unplugged for an
extended period, such devices can store enough
voltage to cause severe injury or death from electrical shock. Never use an electrostatic
discharge (ESD) wristband or other antistatic equipment (discussed later in this chapter)
when working with high-voltage devices.


Working Saely with Printers
When working on printers, remove or constrain anything that might dangle down into the
moving parts. This includes long hair, clothing, jewelry, long sleeves, scarves, and neckties.
A necktie or scarf itself can also build up a static charge that it can pass to the component if
it touches it. When wearing a tie or scarf, make sure you either tuck it into your shirt or use a
clip or tie tack.



Working Saely with Power Supplies
The power stored in the capacitors in a computer’s high-voltage power supply is enough
to cause injury or death. Simply turning off the power switch is not enough. Even when
turned off, the power supply in a computer or printer can provide electricity, and most
motherboards continue to have power applied—a technology called soft power

To be safe, unplug the power supply and never wear an ESD wrist
strap (covered later in this chapter) when replacing or handling a power supply. Never open
a power supply unless you are specially trained to do so because of the risk of electrocution;
if a power supply or one of its fans isn’t working, replace the entire unit.

Beore the introduction
o the ATX motherboard design (1995),
some technicians used to leave the power
supply plugged in while they worked on the
computer to allow static to bleed away rom
the computer into the wall outlet’s ground
wire. That worked because in those old AT
motherboard systems, the motherboard
received no power when the computer was
of. In modern systems, the motherboard
continues to receive power whenever the PC
is plugged in, so there is a risk o electrical
shock even when the computer is of. That’s
why today’s technicians always unplug
power beore servicing a PC.

Working Saely with Display Devices
Although flat-panel displays have replaced cathode ray tube (CRT) monitors, there are still a
few CRTs out in the field. Remember—like power supplies, CRT monitors are high-voltage
equipment and can store a harmful electrical charge, even when unplugged. Never open
a CRT case, and never wear an ESD wrist strap when handling a CRT. You do not want to
provide a path to ground through your body for this charge. Flat panel monitors are less
hazardous (especially when off ), but you should not touch a liquid crystal display’s (LCD’s)
inverter if the device is on. And be aware that traditional cold cathode fluorescent lamp
(CCFL) backlights found in some LCD monitors carry several thousand volts.


Protecting Equipment
While personal safety is paramount, you are also responsible for protecting the equipment
you handle to avoid repair and replacement costs


Saely Transporting Equipment
If you are unsure of the proper way to move a computer or peripheral, check out the
manufacturer’s documentation. For instance, to protect fragile components, a scanner may
have a transportation lock that you must engage before moving it. Some heavy devices, such
as heavy-duty laser printers, may require two people to lift and carry.
Power down each piece of equipment and disconnect it from power outlets before
moving it—even when moving it from one side of a desk to another. This includes laptops!
Yes, they are portable devices, but if a laptop has a conventional hard disk drive (HDD),
moving it around while it is actively running can potentially harm the hard drive. This
warning doesn’t apply to mobile devices with solid-state drive (SSD) storage only.
After the computer powers down, unplug the power cord before moving it. This
precaution is not just about electrical power but also about a device not being physically
tethered to a wall when it is on the move. A trip and fall or fumble can result in the power
cord being forcibly disconnected at one end or the other, potentially causing damage.

Be especially careul when moving monitors. They can be ragile, and you must
take care not to drop a monitor or put any pressure on its screen.







The Dangers o ESD
ESD happens when two objects of uneven electrical charge encounter one another.
Electricity always travels from an area of higher charge to an area of lower charge, and
the static shock that you feel is the result of electrons jumping from your skin to the other
object. The same process can occur within a computer. If your body has a high electric
potential, electrons will transfer to the first computer component that you touch.

ESD can cause irreparable damage to your computer’s components and peripherals.
Typical discharges range from 600 to 25,000 volts, although at tiny amperages. Damage to
computer components can occur at as little as 30 volts—a charge you will not even detect
because, under the right conditions, your body can withstand 25,000 volts.
These very low-voltage static charges, or “hidden ESD,” can come from many sources,
including dust buildup inside a computer. Dust and other foreign particles can hold an
electric charge that slowly bleeds into nearby components, damaging them slowly over time.


Protection rom ESD Damage and Injury
There are many ways to prevent ESD from
damaging computer equipment. Low humidity
contributes to ESD, so when possible, keep
computer equipment in a room in which the
humidity is between 50 and 80 percent. Avoid
cold and dry conditions, as that creates the ideal
environment for ESD to occur. But do not allow
the humidity to rise above 80 percent, or condensation could form on the equipment and
cause it to short out.

The American Society o Heating, Rerigerating and AirConditioning Engineers
(ASHRAE) recommends an acceptable operating temperature range o 64° to 81°F
(18° to 27°C), with 50 percent humidity being ideal.

Never use an ESD prevention device in a manner that puts your body between a
power source and ground, such as when working around highvoltage devices.


Before you pick up a loose computer component, if you are not wearing or touching an
antistatic device, discharge any static electricity on your body by touching something metal,
such as a table leg or chair.
Many computer assembly and repair shops use an ESD mat that discharges static when
you stand on it. An ESD mat on a bench table is a safe place to put expansion cards or other

internal components that you have removed from the computer. An ESD mat looks like a
vinyl placemat, but it has a wire lead and (usually) an alligator clip to connect it to ground.
Equipment placed on the mat will discharge static through it.
ESD devices usually have cables that you must attach to a grounded metal object. Some
have a single prong that you insert into the ground socket in a regular self-grounding wall
outlet. In the United States and Canada, the ground socket is the single round socket offset
from the two slender blade sockets. Other cables on ESD wrist or ankle straps or on ESD
mats may use alligator clips for making this attachment.
Circuit boards may come in antistatic packaging, often an antistatic bag, and you should
store used components in antistatic bags if their original packaging is not available. Do not
remove the item from the packaging or bag until you are prepared to install it.
placing it on top of its antistatic packaging does not offer any protection.

An antistatic bag provides no protection when used like a potholder to handle
components. (Yes, we’ve seen people doing this.) There’s no protection provided
on the outside o the bag. ESD protection occurs only when the component is
inside the bag. That’s because the bag unctions as a Faraday cage. (Google that
i needed.)


In addition to the ESD/antistatic products mentioned in this section, there are others,
including gloves, finger cots, labels, cleaners, bins, meters, and spray. 

ESDProoing Your Workspace
Whether your workspace is a cubicle or desk at which you do minor repairs, or a computer
workbench where you do more extensive service on computers and peripherals, follow these
simple steps to ESD-proof your workspace:
1. Maintain the room’s humidity between 50 and 80 percent.
2. Spray your clothing and the work area with antistatic spray. Never spray directly on
the computer or any components or peripherals.
3. Place an ESD mat on the workspace and attach its alligator clip to something
stationary and metal, such as the leg of a metal table.
4. Put an ESD strap around your wrist, and attach the other end to a stationary metal
object (if it has an alligator clip) or plug it into a wall outlet’s ground socket (only if
the grounding strap has an outlet prong).

All computing devices use electricity

As long as the electricity runs through the circuits and wires as designed, all is good.

When electricity jumps from one place to another we call this an electromagnetic pulse (EMP).

The EMP of most concern to techs is electrostatic discharge (ESD).

ESD simply means the passage of a static electrical charge from one item to another.

ESD will destroy the sensitive parts of any computing device, so
it is essential that you take steps to avoid ESD when working on a PC or other comput-
ing device.

All computing devices are well protected against ESD on the outside.
Unless you take a screwdriver or pry tool and open up a PC or other computing
device, you don’t need to concern yourself with ESD.

Antistatic Tools
ESD only takes place when two objects that store different amounts of electrical potential,
of static electricity, come in contact. To avoid ESD
is to keep you and the parts of the computer you touch at the same electrical potential,
otherwise known as grounding yourself to the computing device.

You can accomplish
this by connecting yourself to the computer via a handy little device called an electrostatic
discharge (ESD) strap. This simple device consists of a wire that connects on one end to an
alligator clip and on the other end to a small metal plate that secures to your wrist with
an elastic strap. You snap the alligator clip onto any handy metal part of the computer
and place the ESD strap on either wrist.

The moment you take a piece out of the computer, it no
longer has contact with the systems and may pick up static from other sources. Techs use
antistatic mats to eliminate this risk. An electrostatic discharge mat—or ESD mat—acts
as a point of common potential; it’s typical to purchase a combination ESD strap and
mat that all connect to keep you, the computer, and any loose components at the same
electrical potential

ESD straps and mats use tiny resistors—devices that stop or resist the flow of
electricity—to prevent a static charge from racing through the device. These resistors
can fail over time, so it’s always a good idea to read the documentation that comes with
your antistatic tools to see how to test those small resistors properly.
Any electrical component not in a computer case needs to be stored in an antistatic
bag, a specially designed bag that sheds whatever static electricity you have when you
touch it, thus preventing any damage to components stored within

Almost all components come in an antistatic bag when purchased. Experienced techs
never throw these bags away, as you never know when you’ll want to pull a part out and
place it on a shelf for a while.

ind yourself in a situation where you lack the proper anti-
static tools. This shouldn’t keep you from working on the computer—if you’re careful!
Before working on a computer in such a situation, take a moment to touch the power supply to make sure you are at the same electrical potential as the computer. Repeat every once in a while as you work. Although
not as safe as ESD tools, this "equipment grounding" is better than nothing at all.

Use these tools for proper component handling and storage: ESD straps, ESD mats, antistatic bags, and equipment grounding

Static electricity, and therefore the risk of ESD, is much more
prevalent in dry, cool environments.

Always disconnect power sources when performing maintenance

Electromagnetic Interference (EMI)
A magnetic field interfering with electronics is electromagnetic interference (EMI). EMI
isn’t nearly as dangerous as ESD, but it can cause permanent damage to some compo-
nents and erase data on some storage devices. You can prevent EMI by keeping magnets
away from computer equipment. Certain components are particularly susceptible to
EMI, especially storage devices like hard drives.
The biggest problem with EMI is that we often use magnets without even knowing
we are doing so. Any device with an electrical motor has a magnet. Many telephones
have magnets. Power bricks for laptops and speakers also have magnets. Even a lowly
screwdriver might have a magnet.


Radio Frequency Interference (RFI)
Do you ever hear strange noises on your speakers even though you aren’t playing any
sounds? Do you ever get strange noises on your cell phone? If so, you’ve probably run
into radio frequency interference (RFI). Many devices emit radio waves:
• Cell phones
• Wireless network cards/access points
• Cordless phones
• Baby monitors
• Microwave ovens
In general, the radio waves that these devices emit are very weak, and almost all
electronic devices are shielded to prevent RFI. A few devices, speakers in particular, are
susceptible to RFI. RFI will never cause any damage, but it can be incredibly irritating.
The best way to prevent RFI is to keep radio-emitting devices as far away as possible
from other electronics.
RFI becomes a big problem when two devices share the same frequencies. Baby mon-
itors, Internet of things (IoT) devices (like wireless surveillance cameras), and many
wireless networks share the same range of frequencies. They sometimes interfere with
each other, causing poor signals or even blocking signals completely. These devices need
to be tuned to avoid stomping on each other’s frequencies.



Computer gear manufacturers package their products in a variety of
ways to shield against accidental damage, whether that’s physical damage,
ESD, EMI, or RFI. The typical pink translucent computer bag is coated with a
film that prevents the bag from producing static electricity and mildly protects
the contents against physical contact (and thus damage). Two types of metal
bags offer shielding against EMI and RFI as well as ESD. These are the silvery
bags (such as shown previously in Figure 1-8) you’ll see hard drives packed in,
for example, and the black-and-silver woven bags you’ll sometimes see. These
bags are easy to purchase online and are a cheap insurance policy to protect
your expensive components.
