Safety is everyone’s job, even in an organization in which designated employees are assigned
direct responsibility for safety compliance and implementation. Everyone in an organization
must play an active role in maintaining a safe work environment, which includes being aware
of common safety hazards and acting to remove them to avoid accidents that can harm
people and equipment.

Environmental Concerns or IT Proessionals
As an IT professional, you will be concerned with the environment of the workplace and
its effect on the health of people and equipment.

Protection rom Dust, Debris, and Other Airborne ParticlesProtection rom Dust, Debris, and Other Airborne Particles

When using canned compressed air
to blow dust out of computers and peripherals, take care to keep the can upright while
spraying and avoid tilting or turning the can upside down because the liquid gas that forces
the air out may spill and cause freeze burns on your skin and/or damage components. Never
use compressed air from an air compressor because the pressure is too high and it can
damage delicate components.
When cleaning computer equipment with compressed air or a vacuum, you might stir up
a cloud of dust, debris, or other particles that you don’t want in your lungs. For example, toner
(which is a blend of iron and plastic powder) can be hazardous to breathe in. The dust and debris
that build up inside a PC case can also cause coughing and breathing difficulties if inhaled.
When cleaning dusty items with compressed air, wear an air filtration mask and safety
goggles to keep all that dust and debris out of your eyes, nose, and mouth.

When using a vacuum to clean up spilled toner, make sure it is a model designed for
electronics use, not a regular household vacuum. That’s because the electronics vacuum
has a finer filter on it; on a standard vacuum, the particles can pass right through the air
filter and circulate out into the air you breathe. Household vacuums also generate static
electricity, which is harmful to electronics.

Providing the Proper Temperature and Humidity
Extremes of heat and humidity are damaging to computers and peripherals. A rough
guideline: if you are not comfortable, the PC is not either. A general recommended
operating environment is in the range of 50°F to 90°F (10°C to 32°C) with relative humidity
between 50 and 80 percent. The lower end of that temperature range is preferable for high-
performance components because they tend to run hot. To find the specific temperature
and humidity guidelines for a device, look in its manual. Dust buildup on a component can
reduce the airflow to it, making it run hotter,
so cleaning the dust out of a computer case
regularly can help keep it cooler.
The best operating environment for
computers is a climate-controlled room with an
air filtration system to reduce dust. However,
since this is not always possible, consider an
appropriate enclosure or case that will provide
good ventilation and air filtration.


Providing Good Power
When you consider a proper environment for computer equipment, you must also think
of the power it receives. You should never plug critical equipment into a wall outlet without
some provision to protect it from the vagaries of the power grid. While sags in power below
the 120V U.S. standard can cause your computer to reboot or power off, a power surge can
do significant damage. A power surge is a brief, potentially damaging increase in the amount
of electrical power. A simple power strip offers no protection because it is nothing more
than an extension cord with several power outlets. At a minimum, use a surge suppressor to
protect all computer equipment, including modems and phone and cable lines.


Surge Suppressor
A surge suppressor (also called a surge protector) may look like an ordinary power strip, but
it protects equipment from power surges. Your PC’s power supply will also do this for small
power fluctuations above the 115V U.S. standard, but it will eventually fail if it is the first
line of defense. Therefore, plug your PC into a surge suppressor that has a protection rating
of more than 800 joules. (A joule is a unit of energy.) Look for a surge suppressor that carries
the Underwriters Laboratories (UL) label showing that it complies with UL standard 1449.
To distinguish a surge suppressor rom a simple power strip, look or the UL label
showing a protection rating o more than 800 joules.


Beyond Surge Suppressors
Do not just buy the minimum; buy the best power protection you can afford, which
should include protection from power fluctuations, brownouts, and blackouts. Power
fluctuations involve all sorts of inconsistencies in the delivery of electrical power—both too
much (surges) and too little. A brownout is a period during which heavy demand or other
problems cause a reduced flow of power, which can cause computers to behave erratically
and suddenly power off. A blackout is a complete loss of power. The duration of a brownout
or blackout depends on the cause and the ability of responsible parties, such as electrical
utilities, to correct the problem. Blackouts can last hours or days, and your first concern
related to a brownout or blackout is to have enough time to safely save your data and shut
down your computer. The most common device that protects from power brownouts and
blackouts while giving you time for these tasks is an uninterruptible power supply (UPS). A
UPS will also normally protect from power surges. A UPS is more expensive than a simple
surge suppressor, but UPS prices have come down as more manufacturers have introduced
consumer-level versions of these devices


Plug your computer and display
into the Battery Backup ports, and they will be
doubly protected. Plug less critical equipment
into the second type of port to protect it from
surges only, not from power outages.
To select a UPS, first determine the power requirements in watts for each device you will
connect to the UPS and add them up. Then decide how much time you would require to
save your data when main power fails.
A computer or other device plugged into a UPS battery backup port is truly isolated from
line power because during normal operation, the device runs directly off the battery through
an inverter, which takes the direct current (DC) power stored in the battery and converts it
to 110V, 60-cycle alternating current (AC) power. The battery is continually charging from
line power, and when it loses line power, the battery continues to power the computer for
a short period. The time the battery can power the computer is limited and varies by the
capacity of the battery in the UPS and by how much power the computer draws. Unless line
power comes back on quickly, you have a window of just minutes to save your data and to
power down the computer. For this reason, a UPS device usually includes a data cable and
software. Once the software is installed and the UPS senses a power outage, the software
warns you to shut down. If no one is at the keyboard to respond, it will automatically save
open data files, shut down the operating system, and power down the computer before the
UPS itself runs out of battery power. A UPS is more expensive than a surge suppressor, but
it gives excellent power protection.
