windows logo key + x or right-clicking the Start
  brings up Quick Link menu - extremely handy menu gives us quick access to most of the utilities and apps we need to keep Windows running smoothly.

windows logo key + arrow
  pin window to a location in the direction of the arrow key




PowerShell

command-line utilities

dir  - displays all the files and folders in a specific director











Windows File System

The root of the tree is the drive or disk, followed by a folder, subfolder, sub-subfolder, and so on, until you get to the desired file. The drive or disk gets some designation, most usually a drive letter nomenclature
that looks like “C:”.

the file extension, hidden by default, that tells the OS which
application to use with the file. This pairing of application with file extension is called
file association.


Accessing Folder Options in File Explorer — enables you to make changes in default behavior with the tool. To get to Folder Options in Windows 11,
in the toolbar, click the three horizontal dots next to the View menu option and select Options. In Windows 10, select the View tab and click Options.

On the General tab (General options in CompTIA speak), you can set the default
folder to display each time File Explorer opens. You can change whether a folder opens in the same window or a separate window. You can change the click feature to open a folder
on a single click rather than the default double click. You can adjust privacy settings here
and clear the File Explorer history to cover your tracks.

The View tab (see Figure 2-32), which CompTIA calls View options, presents Advanced
settings where you can Show hidden files, folders, and drives. (File Explorer hides them by
default.) You can toggle file extensions on here (deselect Hide extensions for known file
types.)

Windows hides the “\” characters at the beginning to make it prettier. File Explorer
might show something like “Local Disk (C:) > Users > Mike.” This translates in proper
fashion as C:\Users\Mike.

C:\Program Files By default, most programs install some or all of their essential files
into a subfolder of the Program Files folder. If you installed a program, it should have its
own folder in here. Individual companies decide how to label their subfolders. Installing
Photoshop made by Adobe, for example, creates the Adobe subfolder and then an Adobe
Photoshop subfolder within it.

C:\Program Files (x86) The 64-bit editions of Windows create two directory structures
for program files. The 64-bit applications go into the C:\Program Files folder, whereas
the 32-bit applications go into the C:\Program Files (x86) folder. The separation makes
it easy to find the proper version of whatever application you seek.
Personal Documents Windows uses subfolders in the C:\Users folder to organize files
for each user on a PC. Figure 2-33 shows the default folders for a user named Mike. Let’s
quickly survey the ones you most likely need to know for the CompTIA A+ exams:
• C:\Users\Mike\Desktop This folder stores the files on the user’s Desktop.
If you delete this folder, you delete all the files placed on the Desktop.
• C:\Users\Mike\Documents This is the Documents or My Documents folder
for that user. (Only Windows 7 uses My Documents. The others use Documents.)
• C:\Users\Mike\Downloads Microsoft’s preferred download folder for
applications to use. Most applications use this folder, but some do not.
• C:\Users\Mike\Music This is the default location for music you download.
My guess is that more people have music in iTunes, but that’s just me.
• C:\Users\Mike\Pictures Pictures is the default location for images imported
into the PC, although the Pictures library can (and does) draw from many
folder locations.
• C:\Users\Mike\Videos Videos is the default location for movies and homebrewed
videos imported into a PC






System Utilities

Windows offers many tech tool areas, including Settings, Control Panel, and
Administrative Tools. A lot of tools appear to be standalone tools, but they’re special-
ized manifestations of a toolset called the Microsoft Management Console.

Settings Settings provides a central location and a consistent interface for most of the
important tech tools in Windows

Control Panel The Control Panel, an ancient but still used launch point,
provides access to many of the maintenance, upgrade, and configuration aspects of Windows.

Administrative Tools (renamed Windows Tools in Windows 11) is one example of the
many powerful utilities found in the Control Panel. The Administrative Tools utility
enables you to set up hard drives, manage devices, test system performance, and much
more

Device Manager enables you to examine the state of all the
hardware and drivers in a Windows computer.

Many programs, called applets, populate the Control Panel. The names and selec-
tion of applets vary depending on the version of Windows and whether any installed
programs have added applets. But all versions of Windows have applets that enable you
to control specific aspects of Windows, such as the appearance, installed applications,
and system settings.
