What is an Algorithm?
In general terms, an Algorithm is a well-defined, step-by-step procedure consisting of a set of instructions to be interpreted and performed to produce some output.

While this description may sound restrictive, what defines a given algorithmic process, or may be achieved by one, is hypothetically limitless...

Informal Examples
Anything, from how an individual person might use a pencil and paper to perform arithmetic addition, to the circumstances we experience as reality, could be described algorithmically. In the first case, a step-by-step process used to calculate a summation might be translated into a mathematics lesson, interpretable and executed by a pupil assuming the role of the processing unit. In the later case, the phenomena of reality are understood to arise from the principles characterized by scientific law, processed by the fabric of spacetime. Indeed scientists have derived many computational models to do much the same in experimental simulations.

Recognizing an Algorithm
While no formal definition of "algorithm" is agreed to exist, typical components include:
  a statement of the problem solved
  steps of the procedure to reach a solution
  accepted configuration of input data
  accepted configuration of output data

Modern Algorithms
The concept of an algorithmic process has existed since antiquity. In recent history, the term algorithm most commonly references a set of programming language instructions interpreted and executed by a microprocessor. In the course of its execution, the computational unit the algorithm manipulates transforms input data to arrive at a desired output result, such that each algorithm is said to create an input/output relationship which solves the problem the algorithm is stated to address.

Not all procedures can be considered an algorithm.

Donald Knuth designated five properties widely accepted as requirements for an algorithm:
  Finiteness: "An algorithm must always terminate after a finite number of steps ... a very finite number, a reasonable number"

  Definiteness: "Each step of an algorithm must be precisely defined; the actions to be carried out must be rigorously and unambiguously specified for each case"

  Input: "...quantities which are given to it initially before the algorithm begins. These inputs are taken from specified sets of objects"

  Output: "...quantities which have a specified relation to the inputs"

  Effectiveness: "... all of the operations to be performed in the algorithm must be sufficiently basic that they can in principle be done exactly and in a finite length of time by a man using paper and pencil"

Knuth offers, as an example, the Euclidean algorithm (the procedure) for determining a natural number (the output) that is the greatest common divisor (problem solved) of two natural numbers (the input).

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algorithm
